<languages/>

Open access publications on Tidal and related things.

* N. Del Angel, Luis, Teixido, Marianne, Ocelotl, Emilio, Cotrina, Ivanka, & Ogborn, David. (2019). [http://iclc.livecodenetwork.org/2019/papers/paper111.pdf Bellacode: localized textual interfaces for live coding music]. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Live Coding, Madrid, Spain.
* McLean, Alex, & Harlizius-Klück, Ellen. (2018). [https://zenodo.org/record/2155745#.XCUCvsbgqV4 Fabricating Algorithmic Art]. In Parsing Digital (pp. 10–21). London, UK: Austrian Cultural Forum. http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2155745
* McLean, Alex, Fanfani, Giovanni, & Harlizius-Klück, Ellen. (2018). [https://zenodo.org/record/1548969#.XCUDAcbgqV4 Cyclic Patterns of Movement Across Weaving, Epiplokē and Live Coding]. Dancecult. Journal of Electronic Music Dance Culture, 10(1), 5–30. http://doi.org/10.12801/1947-5403.2018.10.01.01
* McLean, Alex, & Dean, Roger. (2018). [https://zenodo.org/record/1228959#.XCUDZsbgqV4 Algorithmic Trajectories]. In Oxford Handbook of Algorithmic Music. Oxford University Press. http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1228959
* Magnusson, Thor, & McLean, Alex. (2018). [https://zenodo.org/record/1193251#.XCUCMcbgqV4 Performing with Patterns of Time]. In Oxford Handbook of Algorithmic Music. Oxford University Press. http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1193251
* Ogborn, David, Beverley, Jamie, N. Del Angel, Luis, Tsabary, Eldad, Betancur, Esteban, & McLean, Alex. (2017). [https://iclc.livecodenetwork.org/2017/cameraReady/ICLC_2017_paper_78.pdf Estuary: Browser-based Collaborative Projectional Live Coding of Musical Patterns]. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Live Coding, Morelia, Mexico.
* Ogborn, David, Tsabary, Eldad, Jarvis, Ian, Cárdenas, Alexandra, & McLean, Alex. (2015). [https://zenodo.org/record/19349 extramuros: making music in a browser-based, language-neutral collaborative live coding environment]. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Live Coding, Leeds, UK. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.19349  
* McLean, Alex. (2014). [http://slab.org/tmp/p64.pdf Making Programming Languages to Dance to: Live Coding with Tidal] In proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop on Functional Art, Music, Modeling & Design. FARM '14.
* [https://www.perl.com/pub/2004/08/31/livecode.html/ Hacking Perl in Nightclubs]