<languages/>
<translate>

<!--T:1-->
Tidal 1.0.0 now has support for external input, using the OSC protocol. Here's a quick guide to getting it going, including using a simple 'bridge' for getting MIDI input working.

= Open Sound Control = <!--T:2-->

<!--T:3-->
If you just want to get MIDI input into tidal, you can skip to the [[Controller Input#MIDI|next section]].

<!--T:4-->
With version 1.0.0 [[Installation|installed]] and [[Configuration|configured]], then by default Tidal will automatically listen for external control messages over the OSC (Open Sound Control) network protocol, on localhost (127.0.0.1), port 6010.

<!--T:5-->
This is configurable - if you prefer it to listen to for example all network interfaces, and port 6060 you can change your configuration to this:

<!--T:6-->
<syntaxhighlight lang="haskell">
tidal <- startTidal superdirtTarget (defaultConfig {cCtrlAddr = "0.0.0.0", cCtrlPort = 6060})
</syntaxhighlight>

<!--T:7-->
If you prefer to switch off listening to controls all together, use this instead:

<!--T:8-->
<syntaxhighlight lang="haskell">
tidal <- startTidal superdirtTarget (defaultConfig {cCtrlListen = False})
</syntaxhighlight>

<!--T:9-->
The OSC message that Tidal expects has the path <syntaxhighlight inline>/ctrl</syntaxhighlight>, and two values - the key and the value. The key can either be a string or an integer (tidal will convert an integer to a string for you). The value can be a string, integer or float. For example the OSC message <syntaxhighlight inline>/ctrl sf hello 0.4</syntaxhighlight>, for a message to set the <syntaxhighlight inline>hello</syntaxhighlight> control to <syntaxhighlight inline>0.4</syntaxhighlight>.In this example <syntaxhighlight inline>sf</syntaxhighlight> is the OSC typetag. It specifies that the first value is a (s)tring and the second value is a(f)loat see [http://opensoundcontrol.org/spec-1_0 OSC specs]

<!--T:10-->
You could then use this control in a pattern like so:

<!--T:11-->
<syntaxhighlight lang="haskell">
d1 $ sound "bd" # speed (cF 1 "hello")
</syntaxhighlight>

<!--T:12-->
<syntaxhighlight lang="haskell" inline>cF</syntaxhighlight> is what you use for floating point controls. The second parameter<source inline>1</source> is the default value, for when tidal hasn't received that control yet. There is also <syntaxhighlight lang="haskell" inline>cS</syntaxhighlight> for strings and <syntaxhighlight lang="haskell" inline>cI</syntaxhighlight> for integers. For time values (for using e.g. as the first parameter of <syntaxhighlight lang="haskell" inline>fast</syntaxhighlight>/<syntaxhighlight lang="haskell" inline>slow</syntaxhighlight>), use <syntaxhighlight lang="haskell" inline>cT</syntaxhighlight>.  For ratios add <syntaxhighlight lang="haskell" inline>cR</syntaxhighlight>

= MIDI = <!--T:13-->

<!--T:14-->
To use MIDI, you don't have to worry about too much of the above, but for now you do have to run something to convert MIDI into OSC. Here's how to do that using SuperCollider. First, with Tidal (e.g. inside atom) and SuperDirt already running, run the below code block in supercollider:

<!--T:15-->
<source>
// Evaluate the block below to start the mapping MIDI -> OSC.
(
var on, off, cc;
var osc;

<!--T:16-->
osc = NetAddr.new("127.0.0.1", 6010);

<!--T:17-->
MIDIClient.init;
MIDIIn.connectAll;

<!--T:18-->
on = MIDIFunc.noteOn({ |val, num, chan, src|
	osc.sendMsg("/ctrl", num.asString, val/127);
});

<!--T:19-->
off = MIDIFunc.noteOff({ |val, num, chan, src|
	osc.sendMsg("/ctrl", num.asString, 0);
});

<!--T:20-->
cc = MIDIFunc.cc({ |val, num, chan, src|
	osc.sendMsg("/ctrl", num.asString, val/127);
});

<!--T:21-->
if (~stopMidiToOsc != nil, {
	~stopMidiToOsc.value;
});

<!--T:22-->
~stopMidiToOsc = {
	on.free;
	off.free;
	cc.free;
};
)

<!--T:23-->
// Evaluate the line below to stop it.
~stopMidiToOsc.value;
</source>

<!--T:24-->
You should then be able to run a pattern such as the following, that uses CC value 12:

<!--T:25-->
<source>
d1 $ sound "bd" # speed (cF 1 "12")
</source>

<!--T:26-->
If you want to use MIDI in a pattern forming statement, you may find it helpful to [[segment]] the input first, as the raw pattern coming from your MIDI device will be at very high resolution. This example takes only one value per cycle & remaps the value with the <source inline>range</source> function:

<!--T:27-->
<source>
d1 $ sound "amencutup" + n (run (segment 1 $ range 1 16 $ cF 0 "32" ))
</source> 

== Alternative: pure-data == <!--T:28-->

<!--T:29-->
The above SuperCollider instructions are most convenient if you're using SuperDirt, but as an alternative you can use puredata to convert midi to OSC. You can get puredata from https://puredata.info/ (the 'vanilla' version is recommended). 

<!--T:30-->
Then download this file: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/tidalcycles/Tidal/main/pd/midi-osc-bridge.pd

<!--T:31-->
Then if you start tidal, open that file in puredata, and configure your MIDI device in puredata, things should start working.

<!--T:32-->
[[Category:Reference]]
[[Category:Tidal-1+]]
</translate>