---
id: tutorial
title: Tutorial
tags:
 - Functions|functions category
---

You’ve installed TidalCycles and (Super)Dirt,
maybe even made a few sounds, but now you’re ready to get to business
and start really learning. This guide will help you get started with
simple patterns and walk you through all the way to complex
compositions. If you want a super quick run-down of the syntax in
patterns check [Sequence parser
syntax](/wiki/Sequence_parser_syntax "wikilink")

Why not play with the code as you read, running your own experiments by
changing the examples, and seeing where they take you?

## Creating Rhythmic Sequences

### Play a Single Sample

Tidal provides 16 'connections' to the SuperDirt synthesiser, named from
d1 to d16. Here’s a minimal example, that plays a kick drum every cycle:

     d1 $ sound "bd"

Evaluate the above code in the Pulsar editor by pressing
Ctrl+Enter. If you want to stop the sound again, look ahead to the
section on silence.

In the code above,

    sound

tells us we’re making a pattern of sound samples, and

    "bd"

is a pattern that contains a single sound. bd is a sample of a kick
drum. Samples live inside the Dirt-Samples folder which came with
SuperDirt, and each sub-folder under that corresponds to a sample name
(like bd).

To find the SuperDirt samples on your system, in the SuperCollider IDE
select the File &gt; Open User Support Directory menu item. From there,
open downloaded-quarks and finally Dirt-Samples in there. You should
find a lot of folders, each one is a sample bank containing standard wav
files. Feel free to make new folders and add your own sounds to it, see
the [Custom Samples](/docs/configuration/AudioSamples/audiosamples/) userbase page for more
info.

We can pick a different sample in the bd folder by adding a colon (:)
then a number. For example, this picks the fourth kick drum (it counts
from zero, so :3 gives you the fourth sound in the folder):

     d1 $ sound "bd:3"

If you specify a number greater than the number of samples in a folder,
then Tidal just “wraps” around back to the first sample again (it starts
counting at zero, e.g. in a folder with five samples, “bd:5” would play
“bd:0”).

It’s also possible to specify the sample number separately:

    d1 $ sound "bd" # n "3"

The usefulness of doing this will become apparent later.

### Sequences From Multiple Samples

Putting things in quotes allows you to define a sequence. For example,
the following gives you a pattern of kick drum then snare:

    d1 $ sound "bd sd:1"

When you run the code above, you are replacing the previous pattern with
another one on-the-fly. Congratulations, you’re live coding.

### Playing More Than One Sequence

The easiest way to play multiple sequences at the same time is to use
two or more connections to the synthesizer:

    d1 $ sound "bd sd:1"

    d2 $ sound "hh hh hh hh"

    d3 $ sound "arpy"

NOTE: each connection must be evaluated separately in your text editor.
That is, you must press Ctrl+Enter three times, once for each line
above. *Make sure that there is a blank line between them each pattern*,
or Tidal will evaluate them together and get confused (if you want to
evaluate just one line, you can press shift-enter).

ANOTHER NOTE: If you prefer to refer to patterns by name, rather than by
number, you can do that with

    p

, for example:

    p "susan" $ sound "bd sd:1"

    p "gerard" $ sound "hh hh hh hh"

### What is a Cycle?

A cycle is the main “loop” of time in Tidal. The cycle repeats forever
in the background, even when you’ve stopped samples from playing. The
cycle’s duration always stays the same unless you modify it with setcps,
we’ll cover this later. By default, there is one cycle per second.

Note that this omniprescent cyclic looping doesn’t necessary constrain
you, for example it’s common to stretch a pattern outside of a single
loop, and vary patterns from one loop to the next. We’ll see several
ways to do this later, as well.

All of the samples inside of a pattern get squashed into a single cycle.
The patterns below all loop over the same amount of time:

    d1 $ sound "bd sd"

    d1 $ sound "bd sd hh cp mt arpy drum"

    d1 $ sound "bd sd hh cp mt arpy drum odx bd arpy bass2 feel future"

Note how the more steps you add to the pattern, the faster it plays
them, in order to fit them all in. No matter how many samples you put in
a pattern in this way, they will always be distributed evenly within a
single cycle.

## Silence

At this point you probably want to know how to stop the patterns you
started. An empty pattern is defined as silence, so if you want to
‘switch off’ a pattern, you can just set it to that:

    d1 silence

If you want to set all the connections (from d1 to d9) to be silent at
once, there’s a single-word shortcut for that:

    hush

You can also isolate a single connection and silence all others with the

    solo

function. You can do this like so:

    d1 $ sound "bd"

    d2 $ sound "~ cp"

    -- run this and only the bd plays
    solo 1

    -- unsolo it and the cp plays again
    unsolo 1

## Patterns Within Patterns

You can use Tidal’s square brackets syntax to create a pattern grouping:

    d1 $ sound "[bd sd sd] cp"

Square brackets allow several events to be played inside of a single
step. You can think of the above pattern as having two steps, with the
first step broken down into a subpattern, which has three steps.
Practically, this means you can create denser sub-divisions of cycles:

    d1 $ sound "bd [sd sd]"

    d1 $ sound "bd [sd sd sd]"

    d1 $ sound "bd [sd sd sd sd]"

    d1 $ sound "[bd bd] [sd sd sd sd]"

    d1 $ sound "[bd bd bd] [sd sd]"

    d1 $ sound "[bd bd bd bd] [sd]"

You can even nest groups inside groups to create increasingly dense and
complex patterns:

    d1 $ sound "[bd bd] [bd [sd [sd sd] sd] sd]"

A shorthand for this kind of grouping is to place a period . between
groups, rather than surrounding them in square brackets. We call this
technique ‘marking out feet’. For example these two patterns are
equivalent:

    d1 $ sound "bd bd . sd sd sd . bd sd"

    d1 $ sound "[bd bd] [sd sd sd] [bd sd]"

The former approach is often easier to type, but is a relatively new
addition to TidalCycles, and so many examples will use the square
brackets.

### Layering (Polyrhythms) Instead of Grouping

You can also layer up several loops, by using commas to separate the
different parts:

    d1 $ sound "[bd bd bd, sd cp sd cp]"

This would play the sequence bd bd bd at the same time as sd cp sd cp.
Note that the first sequence only has three events, and the second one
has four. Because tidal ensures both loops fit inside the same cyclic
duration, you end up with a polyrhythm.

You can layer any number of these subpatterns to create many
polyrhythms:

    d1 $ sound "[bd bd bd, sd cp sd cp, arpy arpy, odx]"

And of course you can use groupings inside of the layers:

    d1 $ sound "[bd bd bd, [sd sd] cp, arpy [arpy [arpy arpy] arpy arpy], odx]"

### Playing one step per cycle

To specify a group where only one step is played per cycle, use angle
brackets. For example:

    d1 $ sound "bd <arpy:1 arpy:2 arpy:3>"

The above will result in the sequence `bd arpy:1 bd arpy:2 bd arpy:3`,
over three cycles.

## Pattern Repetition and Speed

### Repetition

There are two short-hand symbols you can use inside patterns to speed
things up or slow things down: \* and /. You could think of these like
multiplication and division.

Use the \* symbol to make a pattern, or part of a pattern, repeat as
many times as you’d like:

    d1 $ sound "bd*2"

This is the same as doing `d1 $ sound "bd bd"`

The code above uses \*2 to make a sample play twice.

You can use the / symbol to make a part of a pattern slow down, or occur
less often:

    d1 $ sound "bd/2"

The code above uses /2 to make a sample play half as often, or once
every 2nd cycle.

Using different numbers works as you’d expect:

    d1 $ sound "bd*3" -- plays the bd sample three times each cycle
    d1 $ sound "bd/3" -- plays the bd samples only once each third cycle

### Using \* and / on Groups

You can apply the \* and / symbols on groups of patterns:

    d1 $ sound "[bd sn]*2 cp"

    d1 $ sound "[bd sn] cp/2"

    d1 $ sound "[[bd sn] cp]*2" -- speeds up the entire pattern by 2

    d1 $ sound "[[bd sn] cp]/2" -- slows down the entire pattern by 2

You can also use the symbols on nested groups to create more complex
rhythms:

    d1 $ sound "[bd sn sn*3]/2 [bd sn*3 bd*4]/3"

    d1 $ sound "[bd [sn sn]*2]/2 [bd [sn bd]/2]*2"

## Modifying Sequences With Functions

Tidal comes into its own when you start building things up with
functions which transform the patterns in various ways.

For example, `rev` reverses a pattern:

    d1 $ rev (sound "bd*2 [bd [sn sn*2 sn] sn]")

That’s not so exciting, but things get more interesting when this is
used in combination with another function. For example every takes three
parameters: a number, a function and a pattern to apply the function to.
The number specifies how often the function is applied to the pattern.
For example, the following reverses the pattern every fourth repetition:

    d1 $ every 4 (rev) (sound "bd*2 [bd [sn sn*2 sn] sn]")

It takes a while to get used to how we’re using parenthesis here. In the
previous example, rev takes one parameter, a pattern, and we had to
‘wrap up’ the pattern sound `"[bd bd] [bd [sn [sn sn] sn] sn]"` in
brackets to pass it to rev. In the above example every takes three
parameters: a number, a function and a pattern. We had to wrap up the
pattern as before, but also rev in order to give it to every. This
should become clearer with practice.

You can also slow down or speed up the playback of a pattern, this makes
it a quarter of the speed:

    d1 $ slow 4 $ sound "bd*2 [bd [sn sn*2 sn] sn]"

And this four times the speed:

    d1 $ fast 4 $ sound "bd*2 [bd [sn sn*2 sn] sn]"

Note that slow 0.25 would do exactly the same as fast 4.

Again, this can be applied selectively:

    d1 $ every 4 (fast 4) $ sound "bd*2 [bd [sn sn*2 sn] sn]"

Note again the use of parenthesis, around fast 4. This is needed, to
group together the function fast with its parameter 4, before being
passed as a parameter to the function every.

In the examples above, the sound function takes a pattern of sample
names, and turns it into a pattern of synthesizer triggers. This might
take a while to fully understand, but the important thing to remember is
that “it’s patterns all the way down”. In this case, this means that you
can operate on the inner pattern of sample names, instead of the outer
pattern of synthesizer triggers that sound gives you:

    d1 $ sound (every 4 (fast 4) "bd*2 [bd [sn sn*2 sn] sn]")

The fast function is also known as density, which is actually the older
name, so a lot of examples will use it instead of the (slightly quicker
to type) fast. They do exactly the same thing.

### Where are all the functions?

There are many types of functions that help you change patterns. Some of
them re-order sequences, some alter time, some provide conditional
logic, and some can help compose more complex patterns.

We’ll introduce many of the core functions in this introduction, and a
more complete list of functions available in Tidal can be found on the
page.

## Applying effects with control patterns

TidalCycles has a number of effects that you can apply to sounds. Some
of them do simple things like change volume, and others do more complex
things like add delay or distortion. This is done with what we call
*control patterns*. In fact

    sound

itself creates a control pattern, and we apply effects by combining
control patterns together.

You can combine control patterns by adding the \# operator between them:

    d1 $ sound "bd*4" # crush "4"

The above code uses

    crush

to create a bitcrushing control pattern with a value of 4 (which sounds
really grungy), and uses

    #

to join that with the

    sound

control pattern.

You can combine multiple control patterns together, with the \#
operator:

    d1 $ sound "bd*4" # crush "4" # speed "2"

The code above both bitcrushes and speeds up sample playback (which
increases the ‘pitch’).

### Control values are patterns too

You may notice that the values of effects are specified in double
quotes. This means that you can pattern the effect values too:

    d1 $ sound "bd*4" # gain "1 0.8 0.5 0.7"

The above

    gain

effect changes how loud the sample is, good for patterns of emphasis as
above. Other control patterns follow all the same grouping rules as
sound patterns:

    d1 $ sound "bd*4 sn*4" # gain "[[1 0.8]*2 [0.5 0.7]]/2"

And you can also apply functions to control patterns:

    d1 $ sound "bd*4" # (every 3 (rev) $ gain "1 0.8 0.5 0.7")

Like with the sound example earlier, you must use parenthesis after gain
in order to specify a function on the gain pattern.

This works too:

    d1 $ sound "bd*4" # gain (every 3 (rev) $ "1 0.8 0.5 0.7")

In the above example,

    every 3 (rev)

is being applied to

    "1 0.8 0.5 0.7"

, which is a pattern of numbers. In the example preceding it, the same
function was applied to

    gain "1 0.8 0.5 0.7"

, which is a pattern of gain controls. In this case, whether you apply
the function before or after the numbers are turned into controls
doesn't matter too much, the outcome is exactly the same.

### Control pattern order

You can specify the effect control *before* the sound control:

    d1 $ gain "1 0.8 0.5 0.7" # sound "bd"

The order that you put things matters; with

    #

the structure of the pattern is given by the pattern on the *left*. In
this case, only one bd sound is given, but you hear four, because the
structure comes from the gain pattern on the left.

### Modifying control values

The \# operator is just a shortcut to a longer form of operator called

    |>

. The

    |>

operator is part of a family of operators, and means something special
about combining patterns, which we’ll cover shortly. All you need to
know right now is that

    |>

is used to combine patterns.

You can use

    |>

to combine patterns conditionally:

    d1 $ every 2 (|> speed "2") $ sound "arpy*4" |> speed "1"

There are other types of operators that allow you to perform arithmetic:

\|+

`|-`
`|*`
`|/`

For example, using

    |+

will perform an addition operation and add to an original value:

    d1 $ every 2 (|+ speed "1") $ sound "arpy*4" |> speed "1"

The code above results in a speed of “2” every other cycle.

The following will multiply values:

    d1 $ every 2 (|* speed "1.5") $ sound "arpy*4" |> speed "1"

More complex patterns and chaining can be done, and with any effect, of
course:

    d1 $ every 3 (|- note "3") $ every 2 (|+ up "5") $ sound "arpy*4" |> note "0 2 4 5"

It might be worth sticking to just these ways of combining control
patterns for now, but if you are curious, you can look into the [others
that are available](/wiki/Combining_pattern_structure "wikilink").

### Some Common Effects

Here is a quick list of some effects you can use in Tidal (the full list
is available in the Reference section):

- gain - changes volume, values from 0 to 1
- pan - pans sound right and left, values from 0 to 1
- shape - a type of amplifier, values from 0 to 1
- vowel - a vowel formant filter, values include a, e, i, o, and u
- speed - changes playback speed of a sample, see below

## Shorthand for numerical patterns

From version 0.9 of Tidal, there are some nice ways of saving on
keypresses when working with numerical patterns.

For example, when specifying patterns of single numbers, such as:

    d1 $ sound "arpy(3,8)" # n "2"

you can miss off the double quotes, so this works fine:

    d1 $ sound "arpy(3,8)" # n 2

However, if you wanted more than one value in that n pattern, you’d have
to put the quotes in:

    d1 $ sound "arpy(3,8)" # n "2 5"

You can also treat patterns of numbers as simple numbers in other ways.
For example doing algebra:

    d1 $ sound "arpy(3,8)" # n ("0 2" * 2)

    d1 $ sound "arpy(3,8)" # n (every 4 (* 2) "0 2")

    d1 $ n (off 0.125 (+12) $ off 0.25 (+7) $ slow 2 $ "0(3,8) [5 7]") # sound "supergong"

(The

    supergong

sound requires

    sc3-plugins

to be installed.)

This is still quite new to everyone, so you will not see it used much in
the documentation yet.

You can also now specify increasing or decreasing numbers with a range,
for example this:

     d1 $ n "[0 .. 7] [3 .. 1]" # sound "supergong"

... is shorthand for:

    d1 $ n "[0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7] [3 2 1]" # sound "supergong"

## Sample Playback Speed (and Pitch)

You can change the playback speed of a sample in TidalCycles by using
the speed effect. You can use speed to change pitches, to create a weird
effect, or to match the length of a sample to a specific period of the
cycle time (but see the loopAt function for an easy way of doing the
latter).

You can set a sample’s speed by using the speed effect with a number.

- speed "1" plays a sample at its original speed
- speed "0.5" plays a sample at half of its original speed
- speed "2" plays a sample at double its original speed

<!-- -->

    d1 $ sound "arpy" # speed "1"

    d1 $ sound "arpy" # speed "0.5"

    d1 $ sound "arpy" # speed "2"

Just like other effects, you can specify a pattern for speed:

d1 $ speed "1 0.5 2 1.5" \# sound "arpy"

You can also reverse a sample by specifying negative values:

    d1 $ speed "-1 -0.5 -2 -1.5" # sound "arpy"

### Play a sample at multiple speeds simultaneously

Use the pattern grouping syntax with a comma to cause speed to play a
sample back at multiple speeds at the same time:

    d1 $ sound "arpy" # speed "[1, 1.5]"
    d1 $ speed "[1 0.5, 1.5 2 3 4]" # sound "arpy"

### 12-tone scale speeds

You can also use the up function to change playback speed. up is a
shortcut effect that matches speeds to half steps on a 12-tone scale.
For example, the following plays a chromatic scale:

    d1 $ up "0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11" # sound "arpy"

You can also use the run function to create an incrementing pattern of
integers:

    d1 $ up (run 12) # sound "arpy".

The `run` function will be discussed later.

## Euclidean Sequences

If you give two numbers in parenthesis after an element in a pattern,
then Tidal will distribute the first number of sounds equally across the
second number of steps:

    d1 $ sound "bd(5,8)"

You can also use the [euclid](euclid "wikilink") function to do this.
[euclid](euclid "wikilink") takes the same two arguments as what is used
in the parenthesis above:

    d1 $ euclid 5 8 $ sound "bd"

You can use the parenthesis notation within a single element of a
pattern:

    d1 $ sound "bd(3,8) sn*2"

    d1 $ sound "bd(3,8) sn(5,8)"

You can also add a third parameter, which ‘rotates’ the pattern so it
starts on a different step:

    d1 $ sound "bd(5,8,2)"

What this third parameter actually does it rotate time. To better illustrate this you can run `drawLine x(3,8)`, which shows the pattern on a linear timeline, with x showing events:

`|x..x..x.|x..x..x.|x..x..x.|x..x..x.|x..x..x.|x..x..x.|x..x..x.`

By rotating it by one step (3,8,1) the pattern now looks like this

`|..x..x.x|..x..x.x|..x..x.x|..x..x.x|..x..x.x|..x..x.x|..x..x.x|..x..x.x`

You can also use the euclid function to apply a Euclidean algorithm over
a complex pattern, although the structure of that pattern will be lost:

    d1 $ euclid 3 8 $ sound "bd*2 [sn cp]"

In the above, three sounds are picked from the pattern on the right
according to the structure given by the euclid 3 8. It ends up picking
two bd sounds, a cp and missing the sn entirely.

As a bonus, it is possible to pattern the parameters within the
parenthesis, for example to alternate between 3 and 5 elements:

    d1 $ sound "bd([5 3]/2,8)"

These types of sequences use “Bjorklund’s algorithm”, which wasn’t made
for music but for an application in nuclear physics, which is exciting.
More exciting still is that it is very similar in structure to the one
of the first known algorithms written in Euclid’s book of elements in
300 BC. You can read more about this in the paper The Euclidean
Algorithm Generates Traditional Musical Rhythms by Toussaint. Some
examples from this paper are included below, including rotation in some
cases.

- (2,5) : A thirteenth century Persian rhythm called Khafif-e-ramal.
- (3,4) : The archetypal pattern of the Cumbia from Colombia, as well
    as a Calypso rhythm from Trinidad.
- (3,5,2) : Another thirteenth century Persian rhythm by the name of
    Khafif-e-ramal, as well as a Rumanian folk-dance rhythm.
- (3,7) : A Ruchenitza rhythm used in a Bulgarian folk-dance.
- (3,8) : The Cuban tresillo pattern.
- (4,7) : Another Ruchenitza Bulgarian folk-dance rhythm.
- (4,9) : The Aksak rhythm of Turkey.
- (4,11) : The metric pattern used by Frank Zappa in his piece titled
    Outside Now.
- (5,6) : Yields the York-Samai pattern, a popular Arab rhythm.
- (5,7) : The Nawakhat pattern, another popular Arab rhythm.
- (5,8) : The Cuban cinquillo pattern.
- (5,9) : A popular Arab rhythm called Agsag-Samai.
- (5,11) : The metric pattern used by Moussorgsky in Pictures at an
    Exhibition.
- (5,12) : The Venda clapping pattern of a South African children’s
    song.
- (5,16) : The Bossa-Nova rhythm necklace of Brazil.
- (7,8) : A typical rhythm played on the Bendir (frame drum).
- (7,12) : A common West African bell pattern.
- (7,16,14) : A Samba rhythm necklace from Brazil.
- (9,16) : A rhythm necklace used in the Central African Republic.
- (11,24,14) : A rhythm necklace of the Aka Pygmies of Central Africa.
- (13,24,5) : Another rhythm necklace of the Aka Pygmies of the upper
    Sangha.

## Tempo

If you’ve made it this far without changing the tempo in all these
examples, then you’re probably ready to change it up.

Tidal’s core unit of time is cycles per second. By default it is set to
0.5625 (or 135 BPM) It can be set with the

    setcps

function:

    setcps 1

You can execute setcps just like a pattern (using Shift+Enter in your
editor).

    setcps

accepts a positive numeric value that can include a decimal:

    setcps 1.5
    setcps 0.75
    setcps 10

Tidal’s timing is based on cycles, rather than beats, however it is more
common for people to think in terms of beats per minute (BPM). If you
prefer to think in this way, you have to decide how many beats you want
to have per cycle, and divide accordingly. For example if you wanted to
play at 140 bpm, with four beats per cycle, then you could do:

    setcps (140/60/4)

You can also pattern the tempo with the

    cps

control function, for example:

    d1 $ sound "cp(3,8)"
      # cps (slow 8 $ range 0.8 1.6 saw)

## The Run Function

There is a special utility function called run which will return a
pattern of integers up to a specified maximum. You can use run with
effects to aid in automatically generating a linear pattern:

    d1 $ sound "arpy*8" # up (run 8)
    d1 $ sound "arpy*8" # speed (run 8)

In the above we’re specifying the number of sounds twice - in the sound
pattern as well as the up or speed pattern. There’s actually a neat way
of only having to specify this once, simply by switching them round, so
the effect parameter is on the left:

    d1 $ up (run 8) # sound "arpy"

This works because TidalCycles always takes the structure of a pattern
from the parameter that’s on the left. We usually want the structure to
come from the sound parameter, but not always.

Because run returns a pattern, you can apply functions to its result:

    d1 $ sound "arpy*8" # up (every 2 (rev) $ run 8)

For a more practical example of using run, read below about selecting
samples from folders.

## (Algorithmically) Selecting Samples

The sound parameter we’ve been using up to now can actually be broken
into two separate parameters, making it easy to select samples with a
pattern. These parameters are s that gives the name of the sample set,
and n which gives the number of the sample within that set. For example,
the following two patterns do exactly the same:

    d1 $ sound "arpy:0 arpy:2 arpy:3"
    d1 $ n "0 2 3" # s "arpy"

It’s possible to break the sound parameter into two different patterns,
namely s that gives the name of the sample set, and n which gives the
index of the sample within that set. For example, the following two
patterns are the same:

    d1 $ sound "arpy:0 arpy:2 arpy:3"
    d1 $ n "0 2 3" # s "arpy"

This allows us to separate the sample folder name from the index inside
the folder, possibly with surprising results!

There is also special function called samples that lets you do the same
using the sound parameter.

    d1 $ sound $ samples "drum*4" "0 1 2 3"

the code above is the same as this:

    d1 $ sound "drum:0 drum:1 drum:2 drum:3"

Whether you use n and s together, or sound with samples is up to you,
although you might find the former to be more flexible.

Remember the run function? Since run generates a pattern of integers, it
can be used with n to automatically “run” through the sample indices of
a folder:

    d1 $ n (run 4) # s "drum"
    d1 $ sound $ samples "drum*4" (run 4) -- or with samples

And of course you can specify a different pattern of sample names:

    d1 $ s "drum arpy cp hh" # n (run 10)

Again, by swapping the order of the s and n parameters, you can hear the
difference between taking the structure from one or the other:

    d1 $ n (run 10) # s "drum arpy cp hh"

NOTE: if you specify a run value that is greater than the number of
samples in a folder, then the higher number index will “wrap” to the
beginning of the samples in the folder (just like with the colon
notation).

You might sometimes see the samples function wrapped in parenthesis:

    d1 $ sound (samples "drum arpy cp hh" (run 10))

## Combining Types of Patterns

Ok, remember when we started adding effects:

    d1 $ sound "bd sn drum arpy" # pan "0 1 0.25 0.75"

What we’re actually doing in the code above is combining two patterns
together: the sound pattern, and the pan pattern. The special pipe
operators (\|&gt;, \|+, \|-, \|\*, \|/, \|&gt;, and so on), allow us to
combine two patterns. Remember that \# is shorthand for \|&gt;.

We can actually swap sides and it sounds the same:

    d1 $ pan "0 1 0.25 0.75" # sound "bd sn drum arpy"

As we touched on earlier, the main thing to know when combining patterns
like this is that the left-most pattern determines the rhythmic
structure of the result. Removing one of the elements from the pan
pattern on the left results in a cycle with three samples played:

    d1 $ pan "0 1 0.25" # sound "bd sn drum arpy"

In the code above, the pan pattern determines the rhythm because it is
the left-most pattern. The sound pattern now only determines what
samples are played at what time. The sound pattern gets mapped onto the
pan pattern.

You might be wondering how TidalCycles decides which sound values get
matched with which pan values in the above. (If not, there is no need to
read the rest of this paragraph just now!) The rule is, for each value
in the pattern on the left, values from the right are matched where the
start (or onset) of the left value, fall within the timespan of the
value on the right. For example, the second pan value of 1 starts one
third into its pattern, and the second sound value of sn starts one
quarter into its pattern, and ends at the halfway point. Because the
former onset (one third) falls inside the timespan of the latter
timespan (from one quarter until one half), they are matched. The
timespan of arpy doesn’t contain any onsets from the pan pattern, and so
it doesn’t match with anything, and isn’t played.

The rule described above may seem like a lot to keep in mind while
composing patterns, but in practice there is no need. Our advice is to
not worry, write some patterns and get a feel for how they fit together.

Anyway, this composition of pattern parameters allows us to do some
unique things:

    d1 $ up "0 0*2 0*4 1" # sound "[arpy, bass2, bd]"

Above, the sound pattern is merely specifying three samples to play on
every note. Both the rhythm and pitch of these notes is defined by the
up pattern.

It's also possible to switch things around so that structure comes from
the right, by using the operators &gt;\|, \*\|, +\|, /\| and -\|,
instead of \|&gt;, \|\*, \|+ and \|-, for example:

    d1 $ sound "drum" >|  n "0 1*2 ~ 3"

The side of the operator that the \| is on, is where the structure comes
from. In fact, if you put the bar on both sides, structure comes from
both sides:

    d1 $ sound "drum cp" >|  n "0 1 2"

## Oscillation with Continuous Patterns

So far we’ve only been working with discrete patterns, by which we mean
patterns which containing events which begin and end. Tidal also
supports continuous patterns which instead vary continually over time.
You can create continuous patterns using functions which give sine, saw,
triangle, and square waves:

    d1 $ sound "bd*16" # pan sine

The code above uses the sine pattern to specify a sine wave oscillation
of values between 0 and 1 for the pan values, so the bass drum moves
smoothly between the left and right speakers.

Tidal used to have sine and sine1 patterns with different ranges, but
now they are aliases, with both giving a range from 0 to 1.

In addition to the sine pattern, Tidal also has saw, tri, and square,
for sawtooth, triangle and square waves respectively.

Just like discrete patterns, you can control the speed of continuous
patterns with slow or density:

    d1 $ sound "bd*16" # pan (slow 8 $ saw)
    d1 $ sound "bd*8 sn*8" # pan (density 1.75 $ tri)
    d1 $ sound "bd*8 sn*8" # speed (density 2 $ tri)

You can also combine them in different ways:

    d1 $ sound "bd*16" # pan (slowcat [sine, saw, square, tri])
    d1 $ sound "sn:2*16" # speed ((range 0.5 3 sine) * (slow 4 saw))

### Scaling Oscillation

You can tell the oscillation functions to scale themselves and oscillate
between two values using range:

A recent change in tidal repurposed the old scale function to range, to
free scale to be used for other purposes.

    d1 $ sound "bd*8 sn*8" # speed (range 1 3 $ tri)
    d1 $ sound "bd*8 sn*8" # speed (slow 4 $ range 1 3 $ tri)

You can also scale to negative values, but make sure to wrap negative
values in parens (otherwise the interpreter thinks you’re trying to
subtract 2 from something):

    d1 $ sound "bd*8 sn*8" # speed (range (-2) 3 $ tri)

This technique works well for a slow low-pass filter cutoff:

    d1 $ sound "hh*32" # cutoff (range 300 1000 $ slow 4 $ sine) # resonance "0.4"

**NOTE**: Despite the fact that these oscillator patterns produce
continuous values, you still need to combine them with discrete sound
patterns.

## Rests

So far we have produced patterns that keep producing more and more
sound. What if you want a rest, or gap of silence, in your pattern? You
can use the “tilde” \~ character to do so:

    d1 $ sound "bd bd ~ bd"

Think of the `~` as an ‘empty’ step in a sequence, that just produces
silence.

## Polymeters

We talked about polyrhythms earlier, but Tidal can also produce
polymeter sequences. A polymeter pattern is one where two patterns have
different sequence lengths, but share the same pulse or tempo.

You use curly brace syntax to create a polymeter rhythm:

    d1 $ sound "{bd hh sn cp, arpy bass2 drum notes can}"

The code above results in a five-note rhythm being played at the pulse
of a four-note rhythm. If you switch the groups around, it results in a
four-note rhythm over a five-note rhythm:

    d1 $ sound "{arpy bass2 drum notes can, bd hh sn cp}"

Sometimes you might want to create an odd polymeter rhythm without
having to explicitly create a base rhythm. You could do this with rests:

    d1 $ sound "{~ ~ ~ ~, arpy bass2 drum notes can}"

But a more efficient way is to use the % symbol after the closing curly
brace to specify the number of notes in the base pulse:

    d1 $ sound "{arpy bass2 drum notes can}%4"

the above is the same as this:

    d1 $ sound "{~ ~ ~ ~, arpy bass2 drum notes can}"

If “polymeter” sounds a bit confusing, there’s a good explanation here:
<http://music.stackexchange.com/questions/10488/polymeter-vs-polyrhythm>

## Shifting Time

You can use the `~>` and `<~` functions to shift patterns forwards or
backwards in time, respectively. With each of these functions, you can
specify an amount, in cycle units.

    d1 $ (0.25 <~) $ sound "bd*2 cp*2 hh sn"
    d1 $ (0.25 ~>) $ sound "bd*2 cp*2 hh sn"

The above code shifts the patterns over by one quarter of a cycle.

You can hear this shifting effect best when applying it conditionally.
For example, the below shifts the pattern every third cycle:

    d1 $ every 3 (0.25 <~) $ sound "bd*2 cp*2 hh sn"
    d1 $ every 3 (0.25 ~>) $ sound "bd*2 cp*2 hh sn"

You can shift patterns as little or as much as you’d like:

    d1 $ every 3 (0.0625 <~) $ sound "bd*2 cp*2 hh sn"
    d1 $ every 3 (1000 ~>) $ sound "bd*2 cp*2 hh sn"
    d1 $ every 3 (1000.125 ~>) $ sound "bd*2 cp*2 hh sn"

However, in the above case every cycle is the same, so you won’t here a
difference between shifting it 1 or 1000 cycles.

You can also specify a pattern for the shift amount:

    d1 $ "[0 0.25]/4" <~ (sound "bd*2 cp*2 hh sn")

## Introducing Randomness

Tidal can produce random patterns of integers and decimals. It can also
introduce randomness into patterns by removing random events.

### Random Decimal Patterns

You can use the rand function to create a random value between 0 and 1.
This is useful for effects:

    d1 $ sound "arpy*4" # pan (rand)

As with run and all numeric patterns, the values that rand give you can
be scaled, for example the below gives random numbers between 0.25 and
0.75:

    d1 $ sound "arpy*4" # pan (range 0.25 0.75 $ rand)

### Random Integer Patterns

Use the irand function to create a random integer up to a given maximum.
The most common usage of irand is to produce a random pattern of sample
indices (similar to run):

    d1 $ s "arpy*8" # n (irand 30)

The code above randomly chooses from 30 samples in the “arpy” folder.

Hairy detail: rand and irand are actually continuous patterns, which in
practical terms means they have infinite detail - you can treat them as
pure information! As with all patterns they are also deterministic,
stateless functions of time, so that if you retriggered a pattern from
the same logical time point, exactly the same numbers would be produced.
Furthermore, if you use a rand or irand in two different places, you
would get the same ‘random’ pattern - if this isn’t what you want, you
can simply shift or slow down time a little for one of them, e.g. slow
0.3 rand.

### Removing or “Degrading” Pattern events

Tidal has a few ways to randomly remove events from patterns. You can
use the shorthand ? symbol if you want to give an event a 50/50 chance
of happening or not on every cycle:

    d1 $ sound "bd? sd? sd? sd?"

In the code above, the whole sample has a 50% chance if it will be
played or if the whole cycle will be silent.

You can add the ? after the completion of any event or group in a
pattern:

    d1 $ sound "bd*16?"
    d1 $ sound "bd sn? cp hh?"
    d1 $ sound "[bd sn cp hh]?"

The `?` symbol is shorthand for the degrade function. The two lines
below are equivalent:

    d1 $ sound "bd*16?"
    d1 $ degrade $ sound "bd*16"

Related to degrade is the degradeBy function, where you can specify the
probability (from 0 to 1) that events will be removed from a pattern:

    d1 $ degradeBy 0.25 $ sound "bd*16"

There is also sometimesBy, which executes a function based on a
probability:

    d1 $ sometimesBy 0.75 (# crush 4) $ sound "bd arpy sn ~"

The code above has a 75% chance of applying the bitcrush effect pattern
\# crush 4 on every event in the sound pattern.

There are other aliases for sometimesBy:

    sometimes = sometimesBy 0.5
    often = sometimesBy 0.75
    rarely = sometimesBy 0.25
    almostNever = sometimesBy 0.1
    almostAlways = sometimesBy 0.9

e.g.:

    d1 $ rarely (# crush 4) $ sound "bd*8"

## Creating Variation in Patterns

You can create a lot of cyclic variations in patterns by layering
conditional logic:

    d1 $ every 5 (|+| speed "0.5") $ every 4 (0.25 <~) $ every 3 (rev) $
      sound "bd sn arpy*2 cp"
      # speed "[1 1.25 0.75 -1.5]/3"

In addition to every you can also use the whenmod conditional function.
whenmod takes two parameters; it executes a function when the remainder
of the current loop number divided by the first parameter is greater or
equal than the second parameter.

For example, the following will play a pattern normally for cycles 1-6,
then play it in reverse for cycles 7-8. Then normally again for six
cycles, then in reverse for two, and so on:

    d1 $ whenmod 8 6 (rev) $ sound "bd*2 arpy*2 cp hh*4"

## Creating "Fills" and using "const"

You can think of a “fill” as a change to a regular pattern that happens
regularly. e.g. every 4 cycles do “xya”, or every 8 cycles do “abc”.

We’ve already been using every and whenmod to do pattern function fills:

    d1 $ every 8 (rev) $ every 4 (density 2) $ sound "bd hh sn cp"
    d1 $ whenmod 16 14 (# speed "2") $ sound "bd arpy*2 cp bass2"

However, what if you wanted to conditionally replace the pattern with a
new one? You can use the const function to completely replace a playing
pattern.

Let’s start with a trivial example where we use const to replace an
entire pattern all the time:

    d1 $ const (sound "arpy*3") $ sound "bd sn cp hh"

In the code above, we’ve completely replaced the “bd sn cp hh” pattern
with an “arpy” pattern. const specifies the new pattern.

We can conditionally apply const using every or whenmod:

    d1 $ whenmod 8 6 (const $ sound "arpy(3,8) bd*4") $ sound "bd sn bass2 sn"
    d1 $ every 12 (const $ sound "bd*4 sn*2") $ sound "bd sn bass2 sn"

## Composing Multi-Part Patterns

There are a few ways that you can compose new patterns from multiple
other patterns. You can concatenate or “append” patterns in serial, or
you can “stack” them and play them together in parallel.

### Concatenating patterns in serial

You can use the `fastcat` function to add patterns one after another:

    d1 $ fastcat [sound "bd sn:2" # vowel "[a o]/2",
                 sound "casio casio:1 casio:2*2"
                ]

The `fastcat` function squeezes all the patterns into the space of one.
The more patterns you add to the list, the faster each pattern will be
played so that all patterns can fit into a single cycle.

    d1 $ fastcat [sound "bd sn:2" # vowel "[a o]/2",
                 sound "casio casio:1 casio:2*2",
                 sound "drum drum:2 drum:3 drum:4*2"
                ]

`cat` (also known as `slowcat`), will maintain the original playback
speed of the patterns:

    d1 $ cat [sound "bd sn:2" # vowel "[a o]/2",
             sound "casio casio:1 casio:2*2",
             sound "drum drum:2 drum:3 drum:4*2"
            ]

`cat` is a great way to create a linear sequence of patterns (a sequence
of sequences), giving a larger form to multiple patterns.

There’s also `randcat`, which will play a random pattern from the list.

### Playing patterns together in parallel

The `stack` function takes a list of patterns and combines them into a
new pattern by playing all of the patterns in the list simultaneously.

    d1 $ stack [
     sound "bd bd*2",
     sound "hh*2 [sn cp] cp future*4",
     sound (samples "arpy*8" (run 16))
    ]

This is useful if you want to apply functions or effects on the entire
stack:

    d1 $ every 4 (slow 2) $ whenmod 5 3 (# speed "0.75 1.5") $ stack [
     sound "bd bd*2",
     sound "hh*2 [sn cp] cp future*4",
     sound (samples "arpy*8" (run 16))
    ] # speed "[[1 0.8], [1.5 2]*2]/3"

## Truncating samples with "cut"

So far, all of our examples have used short samples. However, maybe
you’ve experimented with some long samples. Maybe you’ve noticed that
really long samples can cause a lot of bleed and unwanted sound.

With Tidal’s cut effect, you can “choke” a sound and stop it from
playing when a new sample is triggered.

Consider the following example where we have a pattern of “arpy” sounds,
played at a low speed, so there is a lot of bleed into each sample:

    d1 $ sound (samples "arpy*8" (run 8)) # speed "0.25"

We can stop this bleed by using cut and assigning the pattern a cut
group of “1”:

    d1 $ sound (samples "arpy*8" (run 8)) # speed "0.25" # cut "1"

No more bleed!

You can use any number for the cut group.

Cut groups are global, to the Tidal process, so if you have two Dirt
connections, use two different cut group values to make sure the
patterns don’t choke each other:

    d1 $ sound (samples "arpy*8" (run 8)) # speed "0.25" # cut "1"
    d2 $ sound (samples "bass2*6" (run 6)) # speed "0.5" # cut "2"

This also works in a stack:

    d1 $ stack [
      sound (samples "arpy*8" (run 8)) # speed "0.25" # cut "1",
      sound (samples "bass2*6" (run 6)) # speed "0.5" # cut "2" ]

## Transitions Between Patterns

Changing the pattern on a channel takes effect (almost) immediately.
This may not be what you want, especially when performing live!

That’s why Tidal allows you to choose a transition that will introduce
another pattern, eventually replacing the current one.

So once we have something running on d1, we can use the same channel
number (1), passed to a nice transition function:

    d1 $ sound (samples "hc*8" (iter 4 $ run 4))

    anticipate 1 $ sound (samples "bd(3,8)" (run 3))

To transition from here, simply change the pattern, and in this case
also change the transition function:

    xfadeIn 1 16 $ sound "bd(5,8)"

The above will fade over 16 cycles from the former pattern to the given
new one.

Apart from `anticipate` and `xfadeIn` there are a lot more transition
functions e.g. some that will force you to keep changing your patterns
to avoid repetitive performances.

## Samples

If you’re using SuperDirt, all the default samples can be found in the
Dirt-Samples folder - you can open it by running Quarks.gui in
SuperCollider, clicking on “Dirt-Samples” and then “open folder”. If
you’re using classic dirt, look in its samples subfolder. Here’s some
you could try:

flick sid can metal future gabba sn mouth co gretsch mt arp h cp cr
newnotes bass crow hc tabla bass0 hh bass1 bass2 oc bass3 ho odx
diphone2 house off ht tink perc bd industrial pluck trump printshort
jazz voodoo birds3 procshort blip drum jvbass psr wobble drumtraks koy
rave bottle kurt latibro rm sax lighter lt arpy feel less stab ul

Each one is a folder containing one or more wav files. For example when
you put bd:1 in a sequence, you’re picking up the second wav file in the
bd folder. If you ask for the ninth sample and there are only seven in
the folder, it’ll wrap around and play the second one.

If you want to add your own samples, just create a new folder in the
samples folder, and put wav files in it.

## Synths

For this section to work, you need to have installed the SuperCollider
sc3-plugins. You can either install the latest version from git, or if
you are using Linux, you may find it in your package manager. On Fedora
the package is called supercollider-sc3-plugins.

SuperDirt is created with SuperCollider, a fantastic synthesis engine
and language with huge sonic possibilities. You can trigger custom
SuperCollider synths from TidalCycles in much the same way as you
trigger samples. For example:

    d1 $ midinote "60 62*2" # s "supersaw"

The above plays note 60 and 62 of the MIDI scale, using the midinote
parameter. You can alternatively specify notes by name, using n:

    d1 $ n "c5 d5*2" # s "supersaw"

For half tones you add the suffixes “f” or “s” (flat or sharp) to the
note in question.

    d1 $ n "<[a5,cs5,e5,g5]*3 [d5,fs5,g5,c5]>" # s "supersquare" # gain "0.7"

Above is a two chord progression A7 D7. Notice cs5 and fs5 as C\#5 and
F\#5, respectively.

    d2 $ every 4 (rev) $ n "<[g5 df5 e5 a5] [gf5 d5 c5 g5]*3>" # s "supersaw"

Now the same chords (A7 D7) this time played as ascending and descending
arpeggios and cs5 written as df5and fs5 as gf5. Play both examples
together for more fun!

You can also specify note numbers with n, but where 0 is middle c
(rather than 60 with midinote).

    d1 $ n "0 5" # s "supersaw"

The default sustain length is a bit long so the sounds will overlap, you
can adjust this using the sustain parameter

    d1 $ n "c5 d5*2" # s "supersaw" # sustain "0.4 0.2"

Many example synths can be found in the default-synths-extra.scd file in
the SuperDirt/library folder or in default-synths.scd and
tutorial-synths.scd in the SuperDirt/synths folder. These include:

- a series of tutorials: tutorial1, tutorial2, tutorial3, tutorial4,
    tutorial5
- examples of modulating with the cursor or sound input: pmsin, in,
    inr
- physical modeling synths: supermandolin, supergong, superpiano,
    superhex
- a basic synth drumkit: superkick, superhat, supersnare, superclap,
    super808
- four analogue-style synths: supersquare, supersaw, superpwm,
    supercomparator
- two digital-style synths: superchip, supernoise

To find the SuperDirt folder, simply run Quarks.folder in supercollider.
The full folder location should appear in the postwindow (which is
usually in the bottom right).

Many of the above synths accept additional Tidal Parameters or interpret
the usual parameters in a slightly different way. For complete
documentation, see default-synths.scd, but here are some examples to
try:

    d1 $ jux (# accelerate "-0.1") $ s "supermandolin*8" # midinote "[80!6 78]/8"
     # sustain "1 0.25 2 1"

    d1 $ midinote (slow 2 $ (run 8) * 7 + 50) # s "supergong" # decay "[1 0.2]/4"
     # voice "[0.5 0]/8" # sustain (slow 16 $ range 5 0.5 $ saw1)

    d1 $ sound "superhat:0*8" # sustain "0.125!6 1.2" # accelerate "[0.5 -0.5]/4"

    d1 $ s "super808 supersnare" # n (irand 5)
     # voice "0.2" # decay "[2 0.5]/4" # accelerate "-0.1" # sustain "0.5" # speed "[0.5 2]/4"

    d1 $ n (slow 8 "[[c5 e5 g5 c6]*4 [b4 e5 g5 b5]*4]") # s "superpiano"
     # velocity "[1.20 0.9 0.8 1]"

    d1 $ n (slow 8 $ "[[c4,e4,g4,c5]*4 [e4,g4,b5,e5]*4]" + "<12 7>") # s "superpiano"
     # velocity (slow 8 $ range 0.8 1.1 sine) # sustain "8"

    d1 $ n "[c2 e3 g4 c5 c4 c3]/3" # s "[superpwm supersaw supersquare]/24" # sustain "0.5"
     # voice "0.9" # semitone "7.9" # resonance "0.3" # lfo "3" # pitch1 "0.5" # speed "0.25 1"

    d1 $ every 16 (density 24 . (|+| midinote "24") . (# sustain "0.3") . (# attack "0.05"))
     $ s "supercomparator/4" # midinote ((irand 24) + 24)
     # sustain "8" # attack "0.5" # hold "4" # release "4"
     # voice "0.5" # resonance "0.9" # lfo "1" # speed "30" # pitch1 "4"

    d1 $ n "[c2 e3 g4 c5 c4 c3]*4/3" # s "superchip" # sustain "0.1"
     # pitch2 "[1.2 1.5 2 3]" # pitch3 "[1.44 2.25 4 9]"
     # voice (slow 4 "0 0.25 0.5 0.75") # slide "[0 0.1]/8" # speed "-4"

    d2 $ every 4 (echo (negate 3/32)) $ n "c5*4" # s "supernoise"
     # accelerate "-2" # speed "1" # sustain "0.1 ! ! 1" # voice "0.0"

    d1 $ s "supernoise/8" # midinote ((irand 10) + 30) # sustain "8"
     # accelerate "0.5" # voice "0.5" # pitch1 "0.15" # slide "-0.5" # resonance "0.7"
     # attack "1" # release "20" # room "0.9" # size "0.9" # orbit "1"

This is all quite new and under ongoing development, but you can read
about modifying and adding your own synths to SuperDirt at its github
repository.
