---
title: New Documentation
author: Raphaël Forment
author_title: Tidal Cyclist
author_image_url: https://club.tidalcycles.org/user_avatar/club.tidalcycles.org/raph/240/45_2.png
---

I've started working on a major overhaul / reorganization of the old [Tidal Userbase](https://tidalcycles.org/Userbase) website. I'm trying to push as much as I can to get this website to be on par with the old one. It's a lot of tedious/mechanic/brainless work but I think that it could be nice to have a more modern documentation website for sharing **Tidal** related things.

## Documentation reorganization

### "Aesthetic" aspect of things 

I've customized the landing page a little bit. Enough to make it feel like a real landing page and not like the Docusaurus template. I don't really know how to customize it more. If you have technical web skills (CSS/JavaScript/HTML), go ahead and make a nice landing page!

### Newcomers section

The `Presentation` section will present very general information about **Tidal Cycles**: what it is? how to install it? what do I need to play? It will not give you any information about the library/language itself. It is entirely focused on dealing with the installation process that is still a barrier of entry for many musicians. I still need to do a tour of the various chat/forum platforms to report the solution to very common installation problems. If you feel like helping me to do so, please proceed :smile: .

There is now a separate section for text editors. I don't know, it felt necessary. I've gathered some tips and tricks that were scatterred on the old documentation in monolithic pages dedicated to each text editor. I imagine these pages as something that can be easily extended to include more information and customization tricks.

### Configuration

The configuration section is made to help people with the technical side of Tidal. This section is mostly about **SuperDirt**, **SuperCollider** and **Haskell** stuff. I tried to push everything concerning sound and I/O inside it.

### Pattern Library

The `Pattern Library` section will certainly be the largest one. It's also a lot of work to compile everything and format it nicely using the new Docusaurus markup. So far, only the `Tutorials` is rather complete. I freely merged/breaked some of the old pages to get something that looks like a complete tour of the basics of Tidal. There is now separate pages for `Synthesizers` and `Effects`.

I designed this section to look like this:
* Tutorials
* How-tos
* Reference

### The rest

Everything else looks like an old bulk import from the main wiki. I will try to reorganize it nicely.

## Why?

Lately, I struggled a lot to find / retrieve all the things I saw/knew about **Tidal**. It felt like if information about  live coding  and **Tidal** was more and more scattered on the web. I want to incite people to collaborate to the documentation process more :smile: . Lots of things have changed in the recent months: new versions, Tidal Workshop, Tidal Forum, etc... The wiki should align to reflect these recent changes.
