<languages />
<div class="mw-translate-fuzzy">
= Automated Installation with TidalBootstrap =
</div>

For an easy, hands-off install, try [https://github.com/tidalcycles/tidal-bootstrap/blob/master/README.md tidal-bootstrap] instead of the manual instructions below.

= Manual Installation =

== Prerequisites ==

=== Required Prerequisites===

Before installing Tidal, make sure the following are installed first:

<div class="mw-translate-fuzzy">
* [https://www.haskell.org/platform/ Haskell Platform] - '''the 'full' version is strongly recommended'''. 
* [https://atom.io/ Atom Editor]  (if you don't like the atom editor for some reason, please check out the [[List of tidal editors|list of alternatives]])
* [http://supercollider.github.io/download SuperCollider] (pick the latest version)
* [https://git-scm.com/ Git]
</div>

=== Optional Prerequisites ===

<div class="mw-translate-fuzzy">
The following is optional, but recommended:
</div>

* [https://supercollider.github.io/sc3-plugins/ SC3 Plugins] - you may need the SuperCollider sc3-plugins if you want to use any of the synths included in SuperDirt. Most of the examples in the documentation will still work, so you could skip this step and return to it later.

== Install TidalCycles ==

<div class="mw-translate-fuzzy">
From a terminal, type and run these two commands ''(ignoring any complaints that cabal has of 'legacy v1 style of usage')'':
</div>

 <div class="mw-translate-fuzzy">
cabal update
 cabal install tidal
</div>

<div class="mw-translate-fuzzy">
If you've never installed TidalCycles before, then the <code>cabal install tidal</code> step may take some time. At the end of the command output, it should say <code>Installed tidal-x.x.x</code> (where x.x.x is the latest version number) without any errors.
</div>

== Install SuperDirt ==

Start SuperCollider, and in the editor window paste in the following line of code:

<div class="mw-translate-fuzzy">
Quarks.checkForUpdates(); Quarks.install("SuperDirt", "v1.0")
</div>

<div class="mw-translate-fuzzy">
Run the code by clicking on it, to make sure the cursor is on this line, then hold down Shift and press Enter. This will download SuperDirt and you will see it has completed when the Post Window displays:
</div>

<div class="mw-translate-fuzzy">
... the class library may have to be recompiled.
 -> SuperDirt
</div>

<source lang="plaintext">
Installing SuperDirt
Installing Vowel
Vowel installed
Installing Dirt-Samples
Dirt-Samples installed
SuperDirt installed
compiling class library...
...
(then some blah blah, and finally, something like:)
...

*** Welcome to SuperCollider 3.10.0. *** For help press Ctrl-D.
</source>

== Install Atom Extension ==

<div class="mw-translate-fuzzy">
Start Atom, and install the TidalCycles plugin. You can find it via the menus under edit > settings > install, then typing “tidalcycles” into the search box. Once that’s installed, restart atom.
</div> 

Once it's installed, you'll need to change the "ghci path" setting for the tidalcycles package to the following: <source inline>~/.ghcup/bin/ghci</source>

Once that’s all installed and configured, restart atom.

== Install VS Code Extension ==
Start VS Code, and install the TidalCycles extension by searching the extensions marketplace.
You can follow the instructions from [https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=tidalcycles.vscode-tidalcycles here] to ensure you know how to use it correctly.

== Test Your Installation ==

Now you are ready to [[Start tidalcycles and superdirt for the first time|Start TidalCycles and SuperDirt for the first time]].